[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Ancient Eastern cultures
throughout time understood
the sacred science and the
power of the individual energy
centers of the body.
Of course, they had
different names for them
that were related to the
contemporary language
of that specific time.
For example, I'm sure you
heard the word chakra,
but I question how many
people truly comprehend
what that word actually means.
Fast forward to today, and there
are many misinterpretations
and misunderstandings
of that simple word,
as well as many others, which
both weaken the meaning of it,
and reduce our
ability to interact
with these mystical centers.
In this episode, I'd like
to take you on a journey
into the mystery of
your body and offer you
a fresh new understanding of
the different energy centers
to show you how you can
create coherence in them, just
like you learned to create
coherence with your brain
and with your heart.
In the previous
episode, we talked
about heart and brain
coherence and all
of its wonderful benefits.
Now, let's build on
that understanding
further so you can
learn how to reprogram
your autonomic nervous system,
along with these individual
energy centers otherwise
known as chakras,
to create homeostasis
and balance
and restore health
back into your body.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Let's start with a brief review
of the anatomy and physiology
of your brain and body.
Each one of these individual
energy centers of the body
have their own frequency.
They carry their own
message or their own intent,
because all frequency
carries information.
They have their own
individual consciousness.
glands, their own hormones,
and their own chemistry, as
well as their own individual
little brains.
Now, the sexual glands
or the sexual organs
are related to the first center.
The digestive glands, the second
center, the adrenal glands,
the third center, the
heart and the thymus,
the fourth center, the thyroid
and the parathyroid glands,
the fifth center, the pineal
gland, the sixth center,
and the pituitary gland,
the seventh center.
In addition to having
their own hormones
and glands and
chemistry, they have
their own individual
little brains.
Inferior mesenteric plexus,
superior mesenteric plexus,
solar plexus, or what we call
celiac plexus, heart plexus,
thyroid plexus, pineal
gland, and pituitary gland.
In each one of these
individual plexuses of nerves
is a cluster of
neurons that would
be like an individual brain.
And whenever energy is moving
into neurological tissue,
we begin to create mind.
So think about this, when energy
moves into your first center,
a certain set of glands,
hormones, and chemicals
are released and it begins
to produce its own energy.
And when energy is activating
that neurological tissue,
that center has its
own individual mind.
By the same means,
when you're reacting
to someone or
something in your life,
or you have to use your will to
overcome certain circumstances
in your life, you
activate and put energy
in your third center.
You begin to secrete certain
hormones and chemicals as well
as different glands
becoming activated.
And this center, then,
has energy in it,
and when the neurological
tissue becomes activated,
this center has a
mind of its own.
By the same means, when
energy moves into your heart,
you tend to be more loving,
more selfless, more giving, more
caring, more trusting,
more creative,
because it has its
own consciousness.
And when energy moves
into the center,
we behave in different ways.
What most people don't know
is that all of these energy
centers of your body
are under the control
of the autonomic nervous system.
Now remember, autonomic
means automatic.
In other words, the
autonomic nervous system
is part of the brain
called the limbic brain,
and its job then is
to automatically take
care of balance and
equilibrium in the body.
It controls blood sugar
levels, hormone levels,
it controls body
temperature, and all of that
takes place beyond
the conscious mind.
I want to review
something very simple.
We have a tremendous
amount of energy
that exists in our first center.
Think about this.
There is enough energy in the
first center of a human being
or many mammals to create life.
Most people have been
programmed into believing
that energy can go
in one direction,
that we release that energy out.
But now let's take a
journey up the spine
all the way to the brain.
When energy is activated
in the first center,
that's creative energy.
And when that energy can
move into the second center,
if we feel safe in our
environment and there's food,
and there's shelter, and there's
protection, and there's family,
and we have networks,
energy naturally
moves into the second
center, and this center
is about consumption,
elimination, metabolism,
breaking down food,
homeostasis and balance.
Now, when the environment
becomes unsafe
and we perceive a threat
or danger, some challenging
situation, energy moves
into the third center.
And now we need our
will, and we need
some power, become empowered
to overcome the conditions
in our environment.
If we're successful in
overcoming those conditions,
energy naturally moves
into the fourth center,
and we love our life
a little bit more.
We love ourselves a bit more.
We feel more whole.
We feel more complete.
We feel more present.
And of course, we
have to then express
our greatest understanding.
We have to express our greatest
expression of love or truth,
and energy moves
into this center.
If we can articulate and explain
that greatest understanding,
energy will move into
the sixth center,
and latent systems of the brain
will begin to become activated
and we will begin to broaden
our spectrum of reality.
In other words,
we'll begin to see
more the way reality really is.
Some veil or some
conditioning will be released.
And if energy makes it
to the sixth center,
it'll move into
the seven, and it
will begin to create
harmony and balance in all
of these individual centers.
And then there's another
center right above the head.
The Egyptians called it the ka.
And we'll call that
the eighth center.
And when energy moves all the
way up to the top of the brain,
if we feel worthy enough
to receive, all of a sudden
now, we open this eighth center,
and opening that eighth center
allows the door for us to
begin to download information
from the field or
from the cosmos.
So it makes sense,
then, that when
people have traumatic
events in their life,
think about early childhood
abuse or trauma or shock,
it makes sense how
energy can get stuck
in each one of
these energy centers
and it never actually continues
on in making its way back
to the brain.
As you've learned
in the last episode,
we have what's called
a convergent focus.
That's when we focus on
matter, something material.
And we have what's
called a diversion focus
or a broad focus
or an open focus,
and that's when we put
our attention or awareness
on energy or nothing
but frequency.
Most people spend the majority
of their time narrowing
the focus on matter.
But according to the
quantum model of reality,
reality is both particle
and wave, matter and energy.
And so in the
introduction, in many
of the meditations
in the work we do,
I train people to
do meditations,
what we called a body
parts meditation.
And I ask people to
rest their attention
on different parts of their
body and then become aware
of the space around their body.
And it was tedious
in the beginning,
because I asked them to rest
their attention on their nose,
and then become
aware of the space
that their nose is in space,
and then their eyeballs
or the space between
their ears and then
the space around their head,
and all of that training
was preparation for
this meditation called
the blessing of the
energy centers meditation.
And it was a practice to
begin to master a convergent
and a divergent focus.
By the same means,
when you become aware
of the space around your
body, the act of doing that
begins to slow your brainwaves
down from beta brainwave
patterns into alpha and
theta brainwave patterns.
Now, what's the
relevance behind that?
Well, if you're in beta
brainwave patterns,
you're separate
from the operating
system where you can begin
to make measurable changes.
In other words, when you're
in beta brainwave patterns,
you're in your conscious
thinking neocortex
and you're separate from the
autonomic nervous system.
So as you begin to open
your awareness and relax,
you begin to slow
your brainwaves down,
and that is training
for this meditation.
As you learned, when we're under
the gun of the fight or flight
nervous system and the brain
and body are knocked out
of homeostasis
because of stress,
the different
compartments of the brain
begin to fire incoherently and
send a very incoherent message
down the spinal cord to each
individual little brains
that are under the control of
the autonomic nervous system.
And all of a sudden,
these individual brains
begin to fire
incoherently, and they
begin to send an
incoherent message
to the associated
organs and tissues
in different parts of the body.
Now, think about this, when
this brain becomes incoherent,
we practice opening our focus
or opening our awareness,
and the act of doing
that starts to create
more order in the brain.
So what if you were
to rest your attention
in each one of these
energy centers,
and where you place
your attention is
where you place your energy?
The more you keep
your attention on it,
the more you're giving it
your life force or energy.
And as you rest your attention
in each one of these centers
and you can become aware of
the space around these centers
like individual beach
balls of energy,
and you move from your first
center to your second center,
behind your navel and
slightly below it,
and that was your target, and
you tuned into its energy,
and then your third
center in the pit
of your gut, resting your
attention in that center
and becoming aware of
the space around it,
as you learned in your heart
and the space around your heart,
in your throat, anchoring
your attention in your throat
and becoming aware of
the space around it,
connecting to your pineal gland,
sensing the space
it occupies in space
and tuning into its
energy and its frequency,
resting your attention in
the center of your head
where your pituitary gland
is and becoming aware
of the space around your head,
just like creating coherence
in your brain, you would
begin to create coherence
in each one of these
individual energy centers.
And when these individual
brains become more coherent,
they begin to send a
very coherent message
to all the cells and tissues
and organs of the body.
So we can understand then that
so many people heal themselves
of so many different
health conditions
because they understood what
they were doing and why.
It has taken some
time for people
to practice both convergent
and divergent focus.
It takes some time for people to
learn how to regulate and slow
their brainwaves
down so they can
begin to reprogram their
autonomic nervous system.
So all of the training that
we've done up until this point
is to begin to practice
creating coherence
in each one of these
individual energy centers.
And as I said, we've seen
people heal from rectal cancer,
prostate cancer,
enlarged prostate,
impotence, we've seen them
heal from uterine fibroids,
uterine tumors, ovarian cysts,
diverticulitis, indigestion,
acid reflux, high liver
enzymes, heart palpitations,
arrhythmias, heart disease,
thyroid conditions, thyroid
tumors, brain tumors,
depression, anxiety,
all different health
conditions, once we
learn how to create
coherence in each one
of these individual
energy centers.
Now, the beauty
behind it is that you
don't have to spend a
whole lot of time doing it
once you know how to do it, and
we begin to ascend our energy
and we begin to create balance
in each individual energy
center.
Let's talk about the word
called ligand or ligar,
meaning to bond.
There are three types
of ligands that you
have in your brain and body.
The first type is called
neurotransmitters.
And neurotransmitters
communicate chemically
between neurons.
They are chemical
messengers that
send different messages
in the nervous system.
The second type of ligand
is called neuropeptides.
And neuropeptides are
chemical messengers
that begin to signal
hormonal centers.
So then once a neuropeptide is
released from the limbic brain,
has a very specific
target, and that target
goes to the individual
hormonal centers.
The ligand then begins to
activate the hormonal system
and we begin to release
certain chemicals.
So then if a person is
thinking certain thoughts,
like they're suffering,
or they're in pain,
or they feel guilty,
they'll begin
to activate different
neurological networks
in their brain
that are connected
to different
experiences of the past.
The moment they begin to turn
on enough neurological networks,
all of a sudden,
neuropeptides are created,
and now we begin to signal
different hormonal centers
for us to begin to feel exactly
the way we were just thinking.
So now that neuropeptime makes
its way to the second energy
center in the body and the
person starts to feel bad,
or the person starts
to feel guilty,
or the person starts to
suffer, or the person
starts to feel unworthy.
Now they're feeling exactly the
way they were just thinking.
The moment you start
to feel those feelings,
of course, the brain
checks in with the body
and generates more
corresponding thoughts
equal to the way
you were feeling.
So now over time then, we keep
taking energy and storing it
in these lower energy
centers of the body.
And now the job is to begin to
create balance and equilibrium
in each one of these
energy centers.
So take a look at the
first three energy
centers of the body.
The first three energy
centers of the body
are energy consumers.
In other words, when you begin
to feel certain emotions that
are related to the first
three energy centers,
we're drawing from
the field and we're
using energy to make chemistry.
When we start getting to
our fourth energy center,
this center and above begins to
release energy or cause energy
to move out.
So then when we blast the
energy centers of the body,
when we rest our attention
in each one of these energy
centers and you tune into
its frequency or energy,
I want you to rest your
attention in these centers,
and I don't want you to
feel them with your head.
I want you to feel them with
each one of those energy
centers.
For example, if I asked
you to rest your attention
in your fifth center and I asked
you to tune into its frequency,
I would want your mind to
be in your throat and tune
into the energy of that center.
When you tune into
those energy centers
and I ask you to
tune in and receive,
you're going to be
drawing from that field
and creating coherence in each
one of those individual brains.
Coherence is order.
It's health.
Incoherence is disease
or a lack of balance.
And if you can put
a coherent signature
over an incoherent
energy, coherence
will begin to
entrain incoherence,
and when that happens
properly, all of a sudden now
when there's total coherence,
we would call that a healing.
So then the formula
for doing this
is putting your attention
in your first center,
becoming aware of
the space around it,
tuning into its
energy and receiving.
Then moving your attention
to your second center,
finding it, feeling it,
paying attention to it,
staying present with it
and tuning into its energy
and its frequency.
And the longer you're
conscious of this energy,
the more you're
drawing from that field
and creating coherence
in that center.
Then you put your attention
in your third center
in the pit of your gut
and tune into its energy
and tune and receive
its frequency,
and so on to the fourth, the
fifth, the sixth, the seventh,
and finally, to the eighth.
And when we get to the
eighth, all I want you to do
is become aware that you're
up in this space up here
and tune into its energy.
And the emotion that
I want you to feel
is gratitude when you do it.
Because gratitude
represents receiving.
And all I want you to do
is feel worthy to receive.
And then you'll go to
this invisible field
around your body, that
field called the true self,
tuning in to your own energy.
Now, let's back up here with
a little bit of physics.
When atoms come
together and they bond,
they begin to exchange energy.
And when you exchange energy,
you exchange information.
Now, you can't see
that individual field.
You can't see the
field around the atoms.
But it's that energy that's
holding the atoms together.
Once those atoms
form a molecule,
they begin to
behave differently.
They have a different
boiling point.
specific gravity.
They have a different weight.
All of a sudden, the
atoms coming together
to form a molecule take on
different characteristics.
And if you keep adding
more and more atoms,
you'll begin to form a chemical.
And there's an invisible field
of energy and information
that's holding that
chemical together.
If you take enough chemicals and
you assemble them into order,
you can create a cell.
And now the cell has its
own individual energy,
its own light and
information that's
literally instructing the cell.
And the latest research
in information biology
says that it's not charged
molecules randomly instructing
the cell, but it's the
cell's light and energy
that's allowing the cell
to have its instructions.
The more coherent that light is,
the better the cell functions.
Now, if you put a group
of cells together,
you'll begin to form a tissue.
And each individual
tissue of your body,
the community of cells will
begin to emit its own light
and information.
And the more coherent
the cumulative light
and information
from that tissue,
it makes sense then the higher
functioning that tissue is.
You take that tissue
and you twist it over
and you form an organ.
Now the organ has its
own individual field
of light and information.
And we could say that in that
field of light and information,
it's instructing the organ
because that energy has
information.
So we know this to be the
case because when there's
been heart transplants
or organ transplants,
in a matter of days, the
person with the new heart
begins to crave the very food
that the donor craved when
he or she was alive,
which means then there's
an awareness of that organ,
and now it's being integrated
into that person's field.
And because there's a
memory in the field,
it begins to change the person's
expression in their body.
You put organs together, you
form what's called the system.
And you could have your
musculoskeletal system.
You could have your
cardiovascular system.
lymphatic system,
your reproductive system.
And each individual
system of the body
has its own individual energy,
frequency, and information.
Now, take all the systems of
the body and put them together,
and now the body has an
invisible field of light
and information surrounding it.
And that field of
light and information
surrounding the body
is the true self.
That we are not matter,
we are energy using matter
for the expression of life.
So then the more you react
to people and conditions
in your life, the more
you're consuming energy.
Whether you're over eating,
whether you're overstressed,
whether you're
over sexual, we're
going to be drawing
from this field,
and over time, we're going to
diminish our own light field.
So as we climb up this
ladder all the way to the top
and we begin to
put our attention
on the field around
the body, what you
put your attention on expands.
So then we finish the
blessing of the energy centers
meditation by becoming
aware of that light field
around your body and tuning
in to your own energy.
And the more orderly
and coherent that
field around your body, the
more orderly the patterns
of information, the more your
body can draw from life force.
And in a sense, we're giving
the body its life again.
We are causing the body
to become more energy.
Now, the more matter
we are, according
to the second law of
thermodynamics, the more matter
turns into disorder.
It's called entropy.
In other words, the more
you feel like matter
and the less you
feel like energy,
the more you're subject to the
second law of thermodynamics,
which says things move towards
disorder if they're material.
If you're experiencing
separation because
of the hormones of
stress, it makes sense
from an energetic
standpoint how the body can
begin to break down.
Now, if you're creating coherent
energy around your body,
then you will experience
what's called syntropy.
And syntropy is the
reverse of entropy.
It means now energy
is organizing matter.
And the more syntropic our
energy, the less likely
we are going to fall victim of
entropy or three-dimensional
decay over time.
In our workshops, we have
done extensive measurements
with an instrument
called the Bio-Well.
And the Bio-Well
was created by a man
named Konstantin Korotkov.
Think of the Bio-Well as
a sophisticated Kirlian
photography machine.
Now, what it's measuring is
the excitation of photons.
When energy is
enhanced in the body,
there's a release of light.
And so we're looking
at the body's ability
to release or organize the
light, and at the same time,
we're measuring the energy
centers of the body.
What we're looking for is
the relationship of how
these energy centers
line up with each other
as well as the
size of the energy
centers to determine if
different systems are working
cooperatively with one another.
So take a look at this
lessening of the energy centers
meditation.
The premeasurement
before the meditation,
you could see the person has
some balance in certain energy
centers and an
imbalance in others.
Take a look at the
end of three days,
the change in both the
alignment as well as
the size of the energy centers.
Now take a look at this one.
There's a dramatic imbalance
in the fifth energy center,
the six energy center,
the second energy center,
the seventh energy center.
And now take a look at just
three days of meditation.
Not only is there
more of an alignment,
but there's also more
energy in each center.
Now, that doesn't look too bad.
Persons not too out of balance.
But take a look what
happens after three days.
Now, that's a healthy, balanced
autonomic nervous system.
Now, this is before.
Take a look at after,
just a few days later.
But take a look at the person's
energy field around their body.
You could see in
the before example
there are certain
areas where there
is a weakness in the field.
Three days later, there
is a dramatic change
in the amount of
light and information
this person is emitting.
They have more energy as a
result of the meditation.
Now, this is before.
You can see some issues
with the seventh center.
You can see some with the fifth
center, the second and third.
And look at the change
in size, as well as
the change in alignment.
This is before.
Very imbalanced fourth,
third, and second center.
Now, take a look at just
three days of blessing
the energy centers.
This is the energy field before.
Take a look at the dramatic
change in the energy
around this person's body.
They are emitting more
light and information,
or better yet, they're more
connected to the field.
Now, this is before.
This is after.
Again, take a look at the energy
around this person's body.
You could see,
just in three days,
this person has a beautiful
coherent field around her body.
There's energy to heal.
There's energy for
growth and repair.
This person has a
lot of life force.
So I said to Dr.
Korotkov when he
came to one of our events
to study our work, I said,
how long does it typically
take to see a dramatic change
in the field like
we're witnessing here?
He said, many times, it
takes six to eight weeks.
The person has to fast,
eat very little food,
has to sleep a lot, has to take
care of themselves and do yoga,
and over time, they begin
to build their field.
And now we're seeing that
this can happen in a shorter
amount of time, because
it's the mind that's
literally influencing the body.
And the only way we can do that
is to change our brainwaves
and focus our attention on
each one of these centers
and the field around the body.
To demystify this chakra
system or the energy centers,
that there's a material
component to them
and an immaterial component to
them, and they are very real.
And as people begin to
get better and better
at reprogramming
them, they begin
to notice significant changes
in their health, as well
as their life.
Now that you have a
better understanding
about the different energy
centers of your body
and how to reprogram your
autonomic nervous system,
it is my hope that you'll
use this information
to create more harmony
and balance in your body
so that you prove to yourself
how powerful you truly are,
that you need less influence
from something outside of you
to be healthy, and that
you understand that you
have the ability to change your
inner state by thought alone.
In fact, this whole
series has been
created to inspire you to apply
this information to your life.
And who gets to reap the
benefits of your efforts?
You do.
Then your family
and friends, then
the people you work
with, then finally,
the community in which you live.
Over the course of
this series, we've
learned how you can harness
the innate power of your mind
to create a new future.
We explored aspects
of the brain,
quantum physics, the
mind-body connection,
as well as the placebo effect.
We discussed the difficulty
of change and the difference
between living in survival
and living in creation.
You learned how to activate
latent systems in your brain
in order to induce a
mystical experience.
We started to demystify
the power of meditation
and how this daily
practice can help
you achieve all the
richness that this life has
to offer you.
I'm your host, Dr. Joe
Dispenza for "Rewired,"
and thank you for joining
me on this journey.
And remember, all of us have the
potential become supernatural
with a little understanding of
how extraordinary we truly are.
[MUSIC PLAYING]